[decisions] errors (#4716)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/0_drafts/errors_core.md

# Errors without `errorKey`

## Problem

We often use a `Key * errorKey` argument to return error information via metadata (see related decisions).
In `libelektra-core`, however, that would be inappropriate and sometimes even impossible (e.g., `keyNew`).

> Therefore, we need a different concept for errors, when an `errorKey` cannot be used.

Author: I see your point, but I'll phrase it differently. I don't think it is as big a problem as your suggestion makes it sound like.

## Constraints

- Using special return values as errors may be limited.
  For example, only `NULL` is an invalid pointer and sometimes even that is a legitimate non-error result.
- It should be easy to detect error cases and distinguish between errors, once an error is detected.
- It should be hard to miss the fact that errors are possible.
  Note, however, this does not mean checking for an error should be enforced.
  There are many cases, where the caller knows an error is impossible, because of the previous code path.
  The requirement is analogous to the `Key * errorKey` argument.
  The presence of the argument makes it obvious that errors _can_ happen, but you can easily omit the error check when you want to.
- Adding error indications should not make the API less convenient to use.

## Assumptions

- In many cases, it is possible to avoid error cases through the preceding code path.

> - When an error occurred, the kind error can be distinguished after the fact in many cases.

Author: Well that depends on what "the problem" is defined as... If it is "how to report errors, so the user can distinguish them?", then yes, this assumption invalidates that question. But the problem is more general: "how to report errors, without using `Key * errorKey`?".

The assumption just says, it is not always necessary to report separate errors values for every error case to let the caller distinguish between errors. Maybe, I need to rephrase it...

- Callers normally don't care about the exact error, unless they can do something about it.
  This could be:
  - reporting the error to a user
  - switching to a different code path
  - (during debugging) changing the code
- Functions can be written in a such a way that they detect and report all errors without permanent effects.

## Considered Alternatives

### Extra argument

All functions that report errors take a `int * error` argument to which errors can be written.

This makes the API much more convoluted to use.

A benefit would be the return value remains fully usable.

### Thread Local Storage

Use a field in thread local storage (TLS) to store errors similar to `errno`.

This leaves the API design entirely open.

TLS was only standardized in C11, while Elektra currently only requires C99.

This has all the same issues as `errno`: needs to be cleared to detect errors, can only store one error (per thread), etc.

> ### Pragmatic solution

Author: 1. "next to memory errors" doesn't make it clear whether every function has 1 (for everything) or 2 (for memory and other) error values.
2. "Redesign API" is a new idea, which I'll add. But I believe it would be unnecessarily restrictive. For example, you couldn't have a `elektraCheckEscapedName` function that returns different values for different problems with the name (illegal escape, invalid namespace, etc.). You could argue those are not "error cases", but then what's the point of the restriction in the first place.
3. "Require users to check preconditions" goes partly in the direction of "Pragmatic Solution". I don't quite understand how it would work though. So the user has to do all the precondition checks. But what happens if they don't? the part about "against our principle" suggests, the APIs function would not check the preconditions. So do we just try and hope there isn't a segfault?
   If that's the suggestions, then sure I can add that. But that seems pretty stupid and I don't really think adding it as an option helps in anyway.
   If the API functions should still check the preconditions they obviously have to react somehow, which probably still means returning an error, but maybe just always the same error. In that case, it's basically "Pragmatic Solution".
   So I think I won't add this one...

> ### Pragmatic solution

Reviewer: > For example, you couldn't have a elektraCheckEscapedName function that returns different values for different problems with the name (illegal escape, invalid namespace, etc.). 

Something like this should be written in the decision. (Btw. it was just by accident that I opened this hidden/resolved conversation.)

The pragmatic solution here is to simply assume "everything will be fine".

Many functions only return errors for simple precondition violations, like passing a `NULL` pointer or otherwise invalid argument.
Especially for `libelektra-core` (the only place where `Key * errorKey` truly cannot be used), all functions must be side effect free.
Therefore, the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.

> If we now assume the function is written such that it fails before it changes any argument's data, then we can infer that only a single error indicating return value is needed.

Author: Probably should phrase it differently move it to be an actual assumption. It's not just about API design (which we control, yes). What this is about is more that we assume, it is always _possible_ to write the function such that it detects errors and returns without permanent changes.

Because the arguments are unchanged and the only possible cause of errors, we can distinguish between errors after the fact.

As stated, many functions' only error cases are precondition violations.
If the preconditions are simple enough, they can be checked beforehand if it is not clear whether the precondition holds.

> Take for example some hypothetical `keyValue` function, in a world where we have a `key->value` container for COW that should always be present.

Author: I'll try to come up with something. But it will probably still be hypothetical. I wanted simple cases, where we can focus more on the preconditions and less on what the function does. But I also didn't want to use something, where we're already planning to change the API.

Looking just at the error checks, without even considering the function signature:

> ```c

Author: No, actually in this case it is about what the function does. This part is about how we treat different kinds of errors, so we need to see inside the function.

Also a big part of the argument here is that, the user side matters far less than the current API suggests. I strongly believe the in huge numbers of cases, the caller won't even check the return value, and if the do, most of the time they just need to know _if_ there was an error not _what kind_ of error.

if (key == NULL) {
// error 1: precondition violation
}

if (key->value == NULL) {
// error 2: invalid Key, COW container missing
}

// success: return value
return key->value->data;
```

If we want separate error indications for both error cases and a nice API we immediately hit a problem.
The obvious return type is `const void *`, because that's the type of the key value (and we want it const).
But that's a pointer, so only `NULL` could be used for errors.
The issue is, `NULL` may be a valid key value.
So what do we do?

Essentially, we do nothing, "everything is fine":

```c
const void * keyValue (Key * key) {
  if (key == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }

>   assert(key->value != NULL);

Author: You probably missed it and I probably should have used a different function name. In this hypothetical example, `key->value` is not the value itself, but the COW container. And also just in the hypothetical example (not in the real world) this should always be there.

Again, I wanted a very simple example to showcase this "internal precondition" case. I didn't use the name, because that cannot be `NULL`. So `NULL` is completely free to be used as an error value and doesn't clash (something I also wanted to show). Maybe I'll split it into multiple examples. I ended up with more examples than expected anyway...

  if (key->value == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }

  return key->value->data;
}
```

We return `NULL` for both error cases and even let the errors overlap with a legitimate success value.
In the first case, it's fine for multiple reasons:

- Many callers won't care, if the value inside the key is `NULL` or the key itself is `NULL`.
  For example, `keyValue (ksLookup (ks, name)) == NULL` is probably fine either way.

> - If the caller does care, they can easily check `if (key == NULL)` before _or_ after the `keyValue` call.

Author: No, that's cover further down with the `ksLookupByName` example. It has the same "is the escaped name valid" problem, which I assume is what you're referring to?

I didn't want to use `keyNew` or `keySetName`, since they are likely to change with the whole (un)escaped name stuff. Especially `keyNew` shouldn't use the escaped name anymore IMO (to be discussed in #4244).

The second case has a different reason.
The error is not the caller's fault.
It is an internal issue the caller can do nothing about, `key->value` should always be there.
That's why we add an `assert` before the check.

> This will trigger in a debug build, where the internal error can be fixed.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean here....

Yes, that's the point. Only Elektra's debug builds should check these internal conditions. The debug builds are used in our CI (at least I hope so) to run all our tests. That should guard against these issues.

In a release build I think it is bad form for a library to call `abort()` and kill the process. Especially, since we definitely could do something else (like `return NULL`) in this case.

A further note (which I probably should add) the extra `if` check after the `assert` should only be there, if it prevents something like a segfault (like in this case). If it's something more benign like "if the assert doesn't hold, we leak memory" then there shouldn't be an extra check.

However, this is the part of the suggested solution I'm most flexible about. I do think we should have separate rules for internal conditions that the user may not even be able to check. But I'm open to different solutions for them.

For release builds, the `assert` won't be there.
Instead, we return `NULL`, so the caller can do something and doesn't have to deal with the internal bug.

This overlapping of error and success values has especially positive effects, when we talk about boolean functions:

```c
// returns 1 if key is "foo", 0 if key is not "foo", and -1 if key == NULL
int keyIsFooInt (Key * key);

> // returns true if key is "foo", false otherwise (including if key == NULL)

Reviewer: Seems to me quite unrelated.

Author: The connection to this decision is: Not all functions need a specific error value. Sometimes it is good enough or maybe even better, to use a default value for things like `NULL` arguments.

```

Because we return a pointer, the only error option is `NULL`.
But that could mean multiple things:

- No such key found
- Error: `ks == NULL`
- Error: `escapedName == NULL`
- Error: `escapedName` not a valid escaped name

If the caller wants to know which of these was the case, they have to do additional checks.
For the first three cases that's easy, that's just two simple `NULL`-checks.
But detecting the last case is non-trivial.
Validating escaped names means checking a lot of rules.

However, there is once again a very simple pragmatic solution ("everything is fine").
We simply provide a public API function that allows checking, whether a `const char *` is a valid escaped name.
Then the caller can just check after the error occured:

```c
// assume we already know ks != NULL && escapedName != NULL
Key * found = ksLookupByName (ks, escapedName);
if (found == NULL)
{
  if (!elektraIsValidEscapedName (escapedName)) {
    // invalid name
  } else {
    // key not found
  }
}
```

## Decision

**Suggestion:** Go with "Pragmatic solution"

## Rationale

Under the current assumptions this is the obvious solution.
Every other solution borders on over-engineering.

## Implications

> - Some functions (e.g., `keyIsBelow`) should have simplified return values

Reviewer: I don't think this is an implication of that decision. If we use boolean for functions returning a boolean is imho a separate decision. I am open to that, I agree that it is weird to introduce a third case just for passing NULL.

# Errors without `errorKey`

## Problem

> We often use a `Key * errorKey` argument to return error information via metadata (see related decisions).

Reviewer: Either directly link (if the decisions must be known to understand this decision) or it is enough if related decisions are linked below in its section.

```suggestion
We often use a `Key * errorKey` argument to return error information via metadata.
```

A prime example of this, a function that returns a pointer and wants to indicate an error via that pointer, only has to option to return `NULL`.
So if there is more than one possible error, the error cases have to be distinguished another way.

Therefore, we need a general concept for errors, which we use when an `errorKey` cannot be used.

## Constraints

- Using special return values as errors sometimes is limited.
  For example, only `NULL` is an invalid pointer and sometimes even that is a legitimate non-error result.
- It should be easy to detect error cases.
- It must be possible to distinguish between errors, once an error is detected.
- It should be hard to miss the fact that errors are possible.
  Note, however, this does not mean checking for an error should be enforced.
  There are many cases, where the caller knows an error is impossible, because of the previous code path.
  The requirement is analogous to the `Key * errorKey` argument.
  The presence of the argument makes it obvious that errors _can_ happen, but you can easily omit the error check when you want to.
- Adding error indications should not make the API less convenient to use.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It should be [hard to use the API the wrong way](doc/DESIGN.md).

```

## Assumptions

- In many cases, it is possible to avoid error cases through the preceding code path.

>   For example, a very common case is that functions return an error, if they receive a `NULL` pointer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, a ubiquitous case is that functions return an error, if they receive a `NULL` pointer.
```

  Often this case can be excluded by static analysis, i.e., because of the preceding code it is impossible that the pointer is `NULL`.

  ```c
  int foo (KeySet * ks, Key * key) {
    if (key == NULL) {
      return -1;
    }

>     // [...] could lots of code, as long as the Key * key doesn't change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // [...] could be lots of code, but the code doesn't change `Key * key`
```

    const Key * found1 = ksLookupByName (ks, "/foo", 0);
    if (found1 != NULL) {
      // no need to worry about key == NULL, because we checked earlier
      // also no need to worry about ks == NULL, because the ksLookupByName would have returned NULL
      const Key * found2 = ksLookup (ks, key, 0);
    }
  }
  ```

- It is not always necessary to report separate error codes, for _every_ error case.
  In many cases, the caller can distinguish after the fact, e.g., `keySetName` fails when the given name is invalid and when the given `Key` has a read-only name.

>   This can be distinguished after the fact, by checking whether the `Key` has a read-only name with `keyIsLocked`.

Reviewer: I agree it can be distinguished but it still might be a problem. I already saw many errors where it was unclear which is the case because the application failed to distinguish these cases and debugging was needed to find out.

A failed KeySetName because of the name could be an input error but the read-only name would be an logic error (wrong understanding of when KeySetName can be called).

I don't think we should put this under the carpet with an assumption but should search for a solution with the best API usability.

Author: > I already saw many errors where it was unclear which is the case because the application failed to distinguish these cases and debugging was needed to find out.

That sounds like an application problem not an API problem.

> A failed KeySetName because of the name could be an input error but the read-only name would be an logic error (wrong understanding of when KeySetName can be called).

I see two ways this could happen (assuming there is an error check at all):
1. The application developer didn't read the docs of `keySetName` properly and assumed an error always means invalid keyname. As long as our error cases are documented properly, this is clearly an issue with the application, not with the API.
2. The application developer did do everything properly, but _after_ they wrote their application, we added a new error case to `keySetName` and reused the same error value. _That_ is our problem. But one could argue that this is an API breaking change. However, this issue also happens with any other solution, if we reuse error values for unrelated errors _after the fact_. 

There is also the obvious issue that can always happen in C: The application developer might not be checking for errors at all. That's a problem we cannot avoid. So we simply can't write an API that forces callers to check for errors.

> [We] should search for a solution with the best API usability.

That's exactly my point. We can't make a general statement about the API. To get the best API, it has to be decided on a case by case basis.

That's also my argument against the "Redesign API" and "Require caller to check preconditions" options. IMO we will just regret such strict rules at some point and we'll have to revisit the decision, because there is no good option left.

Reviewer: > We can't make a general statement about the API. To get the best API, it has to be decided on a case by case basis.

But we also cannot do arbitrary changes. There must be concepts behind the API, that are fulfilled consistently to the point. E.g. the return value 1 means success, 0 no change, -1 error. To change something like this, a decision can be a good method, so it is a good idea to have such a decision. At the moment the decision is just to unfocused to be useful.

Author: > There must be concepts behind the API, that are fulfilled consistently to the point.

That's the whole point of this decision: Coming up with these concepts/rules.

I'm pretty sure we are on the same page, here and are just "talking past each other". I'll resolve the thread.

- Functions can be written in a such a way that they detect and report all errors without permanent effects.

- The functions that cannot use a `Key * errorKey`, are side-effect-free.
  Therefore, the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.

## Considered Alternatives

### Extra argument

All functions that report errors take a `int * error` argument to which errors can be written.

This makes the API much more convoluted to use.

A benefit would be the return value remains fully usable.

### Thread Local Storage

Use a field in thread local storage (TLS) to store errors similar to `errno`.

This leaves the API design entirely open.

TLS was only standardized in C11, while Elektra currently only requires C99.

This has all the same issues as `errno`: needs to be cleared to detect errors, can only store one error (per thread), etc.

### Redesign API

Redesign the API, so that every API function only has maximal one error case next to memory errors.

- `nameNew(name) -> name_object` only has the error case of invalid name
- `keyNew(name_object)` won't have error cases anymore
- `keySetName(name_object)` only has the error case of read-only names

> This can be very limiting and in some cases makes it very hard to find out what the exact problem was.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage is that it is hard to be used wrongly.
Users can only call keySetName if they have a valid key name.
If keySetName fails nevertheless, we know that it must be because the name was read-only.
No further debugging would be needed.

This can be very limiting and in some cases makes it very hard to find out what the exact problem was.
```

Reducing a function to a single error value, makes sense if the errors are easy to distinguish.
But for more complex preconditions, this can be annoying and inefficient to use.
While the above example can be solved, by simple checking with `keyIsLocked`, there could less straightforward cases.

> For example, a function `foo` that takes two keynames, both of which must be valid.

Reviewer: Please use examples from our API.

Author: I would, but there is currently no such function that I know of. Definitely no function takes two keynames and I can't think of one that takes two other arguments with complex preconditions.

I still wanted to give the example, because it shows that this is a valid option, even if we add a function with such complex preconditions in the future.

To find out which of the names was invalid, the caller would have to call something like `elektraCheckName(name)` on at least one name.
That's a non-trivial check that is not cheap in terms of runtime.
More importantly, it is a check that `foo` already did, and the result could just be propagated to the caller.

### Require caller to check preconditions

If caller are interested in the specific errors, they need to do extra checks, e.g., before calling `keySetName`, they call `elektraCheckName(name)` or `keyIsLocked`.

This is not so intuitive and is against our principle to make it hard to use the API wrong.

It's also unclear, what the function would do, if the caller did not check the preconditions.

### Pragmatic solution

> We assume the functions in question are side-effect-free and the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.

Reviewer: This is a constraints for the core, please put it to constraints.

Author: It actually already is an assumption in the "Assumptions" section above. I can't make it a constraint, because it's only a constraint for `libelektra-core` not necessarily all APIs that don't (want to) use `Key * errorKey`.

I just mentioned it here as a reminder of the assumption and so the following conclusions are easier to understand, i.e., instead of saying "Because of our assumptions above" and I repeat the assumptions.

> We also assume that functions _can_ always be written such that they fail before any permanent changes to the arguments are made.

Reviewer: Please put to assumptions.

Author: Same as above, it already is in "Assumptions". It's just repeated for easier reading.

# Errors without `errorKey`

## Problem

We often use a `Key * errorKey` argument to return error information via metadata.
In `libelektra-core`, however, that would be inappropriate and sometimes even impossible (e.g., `keyNew`).

Not using a `Key * errorKey` argument can be limiting, however.
Depending on the solution, there can be limited error values, i.e., it may not be possible to use a different error value for every possible error case.
A prime example of this, a function that returns a pointer and wants to indicate an error via that pointer, only has to option to return `NULL`.

> So if there is more than one possible error, the error cases have to be distinguished another way.

Reviewer: The question is if this is actually the case, and in which functions. This would be a decision specific enough. But I already said something along the lines below.

Author: For example `ksLookup`. The return value `NULL` could mean either "key not found" or "invalid arguments". Technically it may not apply 100%, since I wouldn't consider "key not found" an error case. However, conflating a non-error return value with error cases is arguably even worse.

If we go with the more general case (not just limited to pointer return value), then there is also `ksSearch`. Where `-1` means basically the same as `NULL` for `ksLookup`.

If you want a very clear-cut example in the current API then just look at `keySetName`. It definitely conflates multiple error cases into `-1` (read-only key, invalid name, etc.).

A benefit would be the return value remains fully usable.

### Thread Local Storage

Use a field in thread local storage (TLS) to store errors similar to `errno`.

This leaves the API design entirely open.

TLS was only standardized in C11, while Elektra currently only requires C99.

This has all the same issues as `errno`: needs to be cleared to detect errors, can only store one error (per thread), etc.

### Limit to single error value

Always limiting a function to a single error code can be very limiting and in some cases and makes it very hard to find out what the exact problem was.
Reducing a function to a single error value, makes sense if the errors are easy to distinguish.
But for more complex preconditions, this can be annoying and inefficient to use.
For example, a function `foo` that takes two keynames, both of which must be valid.
To find out which of the names was invalid, the caller would have to call something like `elektraCheckName(name)` on at least one name.
That's a non-trivial check that is not cheap in terms of runtime.
More importantly, it is a check that `foo` already did, and the result could just be propagated to the caller.

> ### Redesign API

Reviewer: Such redesign is better done in #4805. The decision here simply would be "Limit to single error value" then.

Author: Not sure what you want to say here. I can rename the solution, if you like, but not sure what this is going to change...

```suggestion
### Limit to single error value
```

If `keySetName` fails, we always know exactly what was wrong; the name was read-only.

However, always partitioning an API like this could create very annoying to use APIs.
It could also have a negative impact on memory use.
To make an API like this work properly, all the intermediate objects that allow us to have functions with a single error case, must be opaque structs.
That means they must be heap-allocated as separate objects.

### Require caller to check preconditions

If caller are interested in the specific errors, they need to do extra checks, e.g., before calling `keySetName`, they call `elektraCheckName(name)` or `keyIsLocked`.

This is not so intuitive and is against our principle to make it hard to use the API wrong.

It's also unclear, what the function would do, if the caller did not check the preconditions.

### Pragmatic solution

We assume the functions in question are side-effect-free and the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.
We also assume that functions _can_ always be written such that they fail before any permanent changes to the arguments are made.

> If we assume that _all_ functions are indeed written that way, then we can conclude, that in theory a single error indicating return value is always enough.

Reviewer: No assumption needed, it would be the new guideline that functions must be that way. (And reviewed that way, see #4426)

Author: If you read on, this solution actually argues **against** introducing such a strict rule, because it could introduce unwanted restrictions.

I'll give you an example that shows how tedious such a rule could become. (I'll add something like this to the file as well).

Let's first assume there is a function `foo()` that needs a valid escaped keyname as an argument. There are multiple reasons why an escaped keyname could be invalid. The user may want to differentiate between those reasons. With the strict "1 error value" rule, the result of `foo()` can't tell us what the issue with the keyname is. But that's fine, we'll just add a `checkName()` function. However, that still must follow the "1 error value" rule. So what we would actually need is `checkNameProblem1()`,  `checkNameProblem2()`, etc. each of which just checks 1 potential problem and the user has to call all of them.

Of course, I assume, that is not what you actually want. So I once again think we are on the same page here. The rule should be: "Try to use only 1 error value, but a useful API is more important" That is more or less, what this solution argues for, just in lot's more detail, because I wrote down all the cases I thought about.

> **Note**: I know the example is somewhat abstract and doesn't use examples from the API. But since we are talking about potential rules for unknown future API, we should think abstractly and not limit ourselves to only the cases we have right now.

### Guidelines

These guidelines shall be applied to each function of the public API separately to decide how the function treats errors.

#### Boolean functions

If a function is conceptually boolean, it should return a `bool`.
This means choosing `true` or `false` as the fallback value used in case of errors.

If choosing `true` or `false` is not feasible, redesigning the function may be necessary.
The function may be doing to many checks in one go and splitting it into multiple functions could make sense.

If splitting is also not possible, an `int` or `enum` should be returned.
The name of such a function must make clear that it is not actually boolean (avoid `is` and `has`, prefer `check`) to avoid accidental use in an `if`.

#### Check preconditions

Functions must check all preconditions.
A (bug-free) function should never segfault, abort the process or otherwise cause unexpected behavior on the caller side.
All conditions that could cause such behavior must be listed as preconditions and checked by the function as a safety measure.

#### `NULL` arguments

A `NULL` pointer argument should never be treated as a separate error case (unless it is the only error case).

> If a `NULL` pointer constitutes an invalid argument, the function should return an existing error (might be used for other precondition checks) or a default fallback value.

Reviewer: Unclear what this means. If we have such a problem, e.g. in the core, the decision should clearly point out the problems.

Author: What I wanted to say is: IMO you should not force yourself to invent an error value just for "illegal `NULL` argument". Try to handle it some other way, or combine it with other precondition failures. If "`NULL` argument" is the only error case and you already return an `int`, you can of course use an error value for `NULL`. But it should even at that point be clear, that the same error code will be used if additional preconditions are added in the future.

Some examples:
```c
//////// combines NULL with (potential) other errors
// returns 0 on success
// returns -1 on precondition violations, including key == NULL
int foo(Key * key);

/////// defines logic for NULL, i.e. NULL is not an invalid argument
// returns whether other is below key
// NULL is considered below no key, and no key is considered below NULL, i.e. returns false if at least one argument is NULL
bool keyIsBelow (Key * key, Key * other);

//////// uses default/fallback value for NULL
// returns namespace of key, for key == NULL the fallback value KEY_NS_NONE is returned
elektraNamespace keyGetNamespace(Key * key);
```

> the decision should clearly point out the problems.

Again, no concrete problems. Just a guideline to base APIs on.

#### Simple preconditions

Simple preconditions are those that can be checked easily by the caller and which are not computationally expensive to check.
All such preconditions should use the same error code, which may even be shared with other error cases.

#### Complex preconditions

Complex preconditions which

- cannot (easily) be checked by the caller (e.g., because there is no public API for it) OR
- are computationally expensive to check (i.e., duplicating the check would be bad)

should always use separate error codes for each error case.
The error code may not be shared with other complex preconditions, but can be shared with simple preconditions or `NULL` arguments, since those are easy to distinguish for the caller.

#### Restructure API

To avoid complex preconditions and the need for multiple error codes, the API can be restructured.
This should, however, be done with caution.

> The API should still remain ergonomic to use and there should not be extra memory allocations creating opaque objects just to guard against possible errors.

Reviewer: I agree this is what we both want to reach with this decision. But without details how it is done, the "rule" is worthless. (Imho it is not a rule but the goal of the decision.)

Author: I'm not sure what you want to say here.

This guideline is meant convey that splitting a function into multiple smaller functions with only one failure case each, **can** be an option. But in most cases to the API would only be safe to use, if additional opaque structs are introduced, which are then passed from one function to the next. If this structs aren't used internally somehow and are just temporary allocations, they shouldn't exist. It is better to have a single function returning an `int` with multiple failure cases and avoid the temporary allocations.

#### Error arguments

If a function needs multiple error codes, return them as an `int` or enum value.
Do not use an error argument (like `Key * error`).
Instead, use an output pointer argument (e.g., `Foo * output`) for the data produced by the function.

> This makes it much more obvious to the caller that errors can occur.

Reviewer: Rules must be more specific. And as you say yourself in the next paragraph, this cannot be a general rule, as it is library-depend. Please let us focus on core in this decision, otherwise we won't reach anywhere.

Author: > Rules must be more specific.

Which is why I called them guidelines and even explicitly stated that we don't define strict rules.

A rule should cover all cases and should be followed unless there is a specific exception.

A guideline is just a guide. You should follow it as much as possible, but it is very much expected that you may have to deviate a bit.

> And as you say yourself in the next paragraph, this cannot be a general rule, as it is library-depend. Please let us focus on core in this decision, otherwise we won't reach anywhere.

This is actually already pretty concrete. But if you want I can make it **very** concrete and also library-independent:

---

If a function needs multiple error codes, prefer returning them as an `int` or enum value.

```c
// returns 0 on success
// returns -1 if key == NULL, or a precondition is violated
// returns -2 if error X happens
int foo (Key * key);
```

> **Note:** Sorry, it's late I couldn't come up with a better example, but I think this first part is pretty clear even without a concrete example.

Error arguments should only be used, if the errors are likely to be shown to a user.
Only `Key * errorKey` or a struct which follows the same error concept (e.g. `ElektraError` from the high-level API) should be used as an error argument.
The `Key * errorKey` concept was explicitly designed with the intention of having errors that can be shown to users, therefore it should be used as designed.

```c
/*
 * @retval 0	on success, this is the only case in which @p ks will be modified
 * @retval -1	on error, the error will be set as metadata in @p errorKey
 * @retval 1	if the help option `--help` was found, use elektraGetOptsHelpMessage() access the
 * 		generated help message
 */
int elektraGetOpts (KeySet * ks, int argc, const char ** argv, const char ** envp, Key * parentKey);

/**
 * @param error Pointer used to report errors
 * @retval True if the checks were successful (or not required).
 * @retval False if the checks were required but unsuccessful.
 */
kdb_boolean_t checkSpec (Key * const parentKey, KeySet * contract, ElektraError ** error)
```

If the function produces data, but also needs multiple error codes, prefer returning the error code and using output pointer argument(s) for the data.
By not returning a value other than the data the caller asked for, it is more clear that the value may convey error information.

```c
/*
 * @param variable pointer to the output variable
 * @retval 0 on success
 * @retval -1 on precondition violation (key == NULL, variable == NULL)
 * @retval -2 if key has the wrong meta:/type
 * @retval -3 if the value of key could not be converted
 */
int elektraKeyToChar (const Key * key, kdb_char_t * variable);
```
---

Internal errors that are never the fault of the caller and always caused by a bug in Elektra, should be prevented with an `assert`.

#### Secondary return values

In the success case, only return data the caller explicitly asked for by calling the function.
Do not use secondary information as the return value.

> If there is secondary information, the caller may care about, use an (optional) output pointer argument.

Reviewer: I don't understand what you want to say here. What is a "secondary return"?

Author: Basically, that the `keySetName` API (and almost all other APIs that return `ssize_t`) is stupid.

There is no reason to return a size. The caller did not ask for a size. They wanted to change the name. That's an operation with no inherent result, so in theory it should be `void keySetName (...)`. But it can fail, so we should `int keySetName (...)`.

The bit about secondary information is meant to say: If the new size really is valuable information then it should be returned differently, since it is only secondary information and not the primary result of the function:

```c
// on success, if outNewSize != NULL it will be set to the new size of key's name
int keyAddName (Key * key, const char * suffix, size_t * outNewSize);

// if outNewSize != NULL it will be set to the new size of ks
void ksAppendKey (KeySet * ks, Key * key, size_t * outNewSize);
```
